#summary Why another editor based on Scintilla/SciTE?

=Why=

SciTE LaTeX IDE is an SciTE based latex editing environment. But wait, why another latex editor based on Scintilla/SciTE? There are already several latex oriented editors out there, e.g. Winshell[http://www.winshell.de/], VisualTeX[http://sourceforge.net/projects/visualtex] etc, and the official SciTE and SciTE-Ru can also be easily configured to behave like a latex editor. 

OK, the reasons are here.     

In making the Chinese TeX suite MiCTeX (which is based on the excellent TeX release MiKTeX[http://www.miktex.org/], I needed an integrated text editor with specific configurations for several tex related languages, including, besides tex/latex themselves, metapost, asymptote and bibtex. Looking through several dozens of free text editors on the net, I found SciTE to be the closest choice. In fact what really attracted me was the lightweight and the Scintilla editing component behind SciTE. 

However, there are something missing from the official SciTE at the time when I began to use it (in versions around 1.68): the tex/latex lexers are too simple to indicate some complicated structures in tex/latex source files, and the folding functionality for tex language was simply missing. There was a metapost lexer but also without folding. Lexing for asymptote and bibtex were completely not supported. Another aspect which I desperately wanted but was unavailable in SciTE is the ability to customize the toolbar to accommodate tex/latex related compiling/previewing tools. At first I tried to solve the first class of problems by contributing to the official Scintilla my personal lexer codes. So I modified the tex lexer and metapost lexer to support folding for these two languages and wrote a simple lexer for asymotote lexer. These lexers were later accepted and committed into the official Scintilla source code. After that I found that I was still not satisfied by these lexers in that the number of lexing styles was too limited and the folding fields was not customizable by the user. So I rewrote the latex lexer and asymptote completely but the changes in the new lexers were too severe that it may break down stream applications if committed into the official Scintilla. So I began to keep a special branch of code of Scintilla/SciTE and make special configurations for tex/latex. 

While writing the lexers I already found another beautiful open source tex editor VisualTeX which is also based on scintilla, and have actually borrowed  some techniques from that editor. As a feedback I also submitted my changes to the author of VisualTeX and thus the latter also begun to support metapost/asymptote as well as user customizable tex folding. However, there is something in VisualTeX which makes me felt it inappropriate to be adopted as my primary tex editor: it was designed to be used by Russian people and hence the encoding support was specially adapted to Russian language. The keyboard shortcuts are also of a very Russian style and there seems to be no easy way to remap the key bindings. Moreover, the language interface contains only English and Russian and it is not easy to find a way to translate it into Chinese.  

WinShell is also a good tex/latex editor based on scintilla. But I found it not open source and is difficult to add extra tools to the interface. Chinese encoding change is also cumbersome in WinShell: one must quit and restart WinShell for the Chinese text to be displayed right and so it seems impossible for two or more Chinese tex files in different encodings to be open simultaneously in WinShell. Last but not the least, WinShell seems to be reluctent to accept the idea of folding  which is a functionality I liked so much.

In the process of modifying SciTE, I found SciTE-Ru project had parcially solved the problem of customizing toolbar buttons. So I began to adapt some of the code from SciTE-Ru. Why not just add my personal lexers into the SciTE-Ru      source tree? Because there is something wrong in SciTE-Ru: the text search for CJK languages is completely broken which stems from a change made in a function called LowerUpperCases in the source. However the change seems to be a necessity for Russian languages and hence the authors of SciTE-Ru doesn't seem to be considering to cure the broken CJK search. Thus I have to keep my branch of SciTE separate. 

In the long run I have added several new functionalities to my branch, e.g. for supporting different languages like tex/metapost/asymptote, I made it possible to customize different toolbars for different program languages (this functionality is now also supported by SciTE-Ru after my feature request). In making my branch like an IDE, I integrated Steve's scite-gui library and wrote some lua scripts to make a tex/latex specific side panel. Other lua scripts are included as well to add various functionalities. I also adopted contributions from users from the Chinese TeX community, mainly from users on the [http://bbs.ctex.org], both to the lua scripts and to the source code.  The number of modifications is so big that I cannot possibly to list the changes in detail. So there is necessity to give it a new name: SciTE LaTeX IDE, or simply LaTeX IDE, and here it is!

=Future Development=

In the Chinese TeX community, there are several TeX bundles/Suites for the ease of end users. My MiCTeX suite is one of them which is based on the MiKTeX release. Other TeX bundles/releases include the MTeX suite [http://bbs.ctex.org/viewthread.php?tid=46541&extra=page%3D1] by mathmhb and CTeXLive [http://thinfilm.ustc.edu.cn/~liangzi/software/CTeXlive/] by liangzi, both have made use of SciTE LaTeX IDE. mathmhb, the author of MTeX suite, is very strong at using script languages. So I invided him to join the development of SciTE LaTeX IDE. We will discuss in detail on what extra functionalities will be added to this editor, by either modifying the source or adding extra script files. Let's anticipate that the future versions of SciTE LaTeX IDE would be more powerful, and if support to more and more programming languages were added, it might be worth to change its name to One-IDE. :)


instanton   

